To those about to graduate / Your journeyman years


A few centuries ago, before the industrial revolution and before the United States was even founded,
most people in Europe lived either on a farm or in a town. Those who grew up on a farm would
typically learn to work the crops, care for the animals, the oldest son would usually inherit the
farm, the daughters would marry into other families, and the younger sons would become workers,
soldiers, monks or move to a town.

Those who grew up in a town could learn one of a variety of skilled crafts or trades: to be a
carpenter, a baker, a mason, a smith, etc. Once a young person was old enough to have a sufficient
attention span to learn something in depth, he would join the workshop of a master craftsman, to be
an apprentice. The apprentice would move out of his parents' home and become part of the master's
household; there he would learn the craftman's tools and techniques over the course of several
years. Apprentices were too inexperienced to be able to charge for their work, so they weren't paid,
and often their family had to also pay a fee to the master to support their son's education.

But once the apprenticeship was completed, the young man couldn't immediately become a master. After
all, mastery is more than just knowing your tools well.


Today, some aspects of the medieval traditions are more remembered than others. Some guilds still
exist, complete with curious rituals and funny costumes, but of course they are no longer the
cornerstones of town society and market regulation that they once were. A handful of people are
[reviving](http://www.guardian.co.uk/money/2006/jul/15/careers.work5) some of the medieval
traditions in a fairly literal way. A lot of history seems to revolve around the remembering the
rules of what was and wasn't allowed.

That's all quite remarkable, and I have a lot of respect for conservation of history. But what I
find more interesting is to try to understand some of the reasons behind traditional practices, and
to translate that reasoning into our current times.


Your journeyman years
---------------------

Nowadays, going to university and getting your degree seems reasonably analogous to an
apprenticeship in medieval times. (Of course apprenticeships still exist, and are still a popular
form of education for subjects that are less academic and more applied; however, as
university-educated computer scientist, I can't speak about apprenticeships from experience.)

I'm not a historian, so take my historic interpretations with a pinch of salt. But the idea of
journeyman years on your way to mastery makes complete sense to me. By the time you've finished your
apprenticeship (university degree), you can be economically productive -- i.e. you know your stuff
to an extent that you're not a burden, and you're able to work on stuff that customers will pay for.
Having made that transition from [net consumer to net producer](http://www.paulgraham.com/hiring.html)
is a key point in your life, and all your education up to that point was directed towards that
point.

But now, you're in the greatest position of freedom that you will ever be in: you've learnt enough
to be valuable, but the dampening effects (you're married, settled down, have a mortgage, have kids,
need to care for your parents) have not yet kicked in. You are still free to do bold, adventurous
things. And with that I don't mean bunjee jumping or white water rafting (nothing wrong with that,
just that it probably won't make you a better programmer) -- I mean this is the time for your
journeyman years.

(Side-note: at this point the political correctness police held a gun to my head and forced me to
announce that I am using "journeyman years" as a historical term, without any present-day gender
bias implied; of course you can be a woman and still be a journeyman, just like you can be a woman
and have the surname Kauffman. Thank you for your attention.)

Why did those young carpenters and blacksmiths go journeying? Wouldn't it be more productive, and
thus economically advantageous, if they started working in a master's workshop as soon as possible,
producing goods that could be sold, rather than wasting their time walking from town to town? Why
was journeying not just something that young people did for fun because they could, but actually
something that became *expected* and *required*?

My interpretation is that journeying is advantageous for intellectual "gene pool" (I guess that
would be "meme pool" if the word "meme" hadn't been hijacked to mean funny pictures on the
internet). In all cultures it's frowned upon and/or forbidden for a sister and brother to marry,
because they are too close genetically; in order for their children to be healthy, more genetic
diversity is required. That's the key to why sexually reproducing organsisms evolve and adapt to
environmental changes much faster than asexually reproducing ones. Bringing diverse sets of genes
together allows biological systems to bring out the best of both, whilst monocultures tend to
emphasise the worse sides and are susceptible to disastrous systematic diseases.

In the middle ages, when long-distance communication required riders on horseback, isolation of
ideas must have been a huge hindrance to progress. Thus, an excellent way to achieve diversity in
the intellectual gene pool is to send your young, educated, motivated people out onto the road, so
that they may learn many good things in distant lands and bring them back home; and conversely to
invite the same kind of person from other parts, so that they may teach you new things that were
invented elsewhere, and bring some fresh air into your little town.

Nowadays, we have speed-of-light worldwide communication, but the rate of progress has also
increased beyond recognition compared to the middle ages. And it still remains true that a lot of
thought concepts and techniques are best conveyed one-to-one, in person, in direct conversation.
Although communication and transfer of written knowledge are no longer the problem, I think mastery
still requires travel, just like it did 400 years ago.

As an academic, you have to do several postdocs in various places around the world before you can
settle down and get a nice tenured position. As a doctor, you typically have to work in various
different hospitals and in other doctors' practices until you can finally open your own practice.

Computer science, software engineering and related areas are a field which lends itself to mastery.
As a programmer, you can create something from nothing, using just your brains and a computer. Even
in big software projects, many key insights and design decisions often come from a small number of
very experienced, very talented individuals. Like Lars Bak behind the V8 JavaScript engine, for
example (TODO more examples).

Reputation is the future of work in software (and probably in other fields too, but I can't speak
for them). Already your GitHub profile is an important part of your identity as a developer. The
more high-profile, valuable, groundbreaking projects you work on, the more your recognition rises,
and the more you will be asked to work on even more exciting projects.

In the middle ages, only after completing both the apprenticeship and the journeyman years would a
man typically marry and settle down. Around that stage of their life, they would also reach for
mastership by completing their *masterpiece*, a particularly fine piece of work which was judged by
his peers.


In your journeyman years, many of the medieval guidelines still hold today:

* Optimise for learning, not money. The medieval rule of thumb was that you should start with a
  small amount of money in your pocket, and return home again with the same amount, years later.
  Live frugally, work to support yourself, but don't try to get maximum earnings, but don't try to
  save every penny either. Learning is what is important at this stage, and making money can come
  later.
* When you take a job, commit to it for a substantial period of time. In the middle ages, apparently
  an accepted minimum period to work with a master was 6 months. Nowadays I would put it more at 2
  to 3 years. Basically, you need to stay for long enough that you get to understand it in depth,
  that you see both the good and the bad sides, that you struggle and get through difficult times;
  but not so long as to cut short the time you have to gain more experience elsewhere.
* When you leave, always leave on good terms. Never leave behind unpaid debts. Never burn bridges.
  You owe it both to yourself (it's better to have friends than to have enemies, reputation spreads
  quickly) and to other journeymen who will come after you. You want your former masters to welcome
  them with open arms too.




http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lieder_eines_fahrenden_Gesellen
http://www.guardian.co.uk/money/2006/jul/15/careers.work5
http://www.rechtschaffene-maurer.de/presse1.htm
http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wilhelm_Meisters_Wanderjahre
http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zunft
