I think the internet is the most important development in human history since the printing press.

This has been said plenty of times before, but I'd just like to reflect on that claim for a bit.

Sure, there have been plenty of remarkable inventions since about 1500. In no particular order,
electricity, antibiotics, the steam engine, vaccines, television, refrigerators, aeroplanes,
genetics, nuclear energy, transistors etc. have all played a huge role in changing the world and
improving our lives. But I still believe that none of them come close to the internet in terms of
importance.

When I say "printing press", I don't really mean the device consisting of levers, panels, movable
letters and other bits of metal; I mean the general technical, economic and social change which
made it viable to *disseminate information to a large audience*, without support from the ruling
powers. And when I say "internet", I don't mean the worldwide network of computers communicating
via the Internet Protocol, nor do I mean the web and HTTP; I mean that it is becoming viable for
*anybody* to take part in an *exchange of information with the entire world*. (Calling it
"interwebs" might be better, as that indicates that the detailed technology is not so important.)
The words "printing press" and "internet" are just placeholders for much bigger ideas.

(History will probably credit one person, maybe Tim Berners-Lee, even though that's inaccurate --
just as it's inaccurate to credit Johannes Gutenberg with the printing press. These developments
are complex social changes with many triggers and contributors, never the work of individuals.)

What has stayed the same since the printing press is that it's about information. What has changed
is that it's now two-way (or many-way) exchange of information, not one-way dissemination.

Firstly, information. Why is that so important? More important than medicine, upon which our lives
depend?

Information is the core of what makes us human. Culture (customs, values, language, art, music) is
expressed, formed and passed on through information. Society and politics is based on information:
ideas, explanations, news and opinions. Sharing information, i.e. communication, is the basis of
all learning, scholarship, technical and scientific endeavours. Sharing of information is what
separates us from the apes.

Next, the mode of communication: it used to be one-way, now it is interactive. Why is that
important?

...say something about control of the media important for power and politics, at least in the 20th
century; it used to require a lot of capital to get printing presses, ink and paper, or to start
your own radio station. Now all you need is a computer and an internet connection.

When something is published on paper, like in a book or a newspaper, that has several important
properties: the text cannot easily be changed (pro: authors are likely to check things more
carefully before sending the text to the publisher; con: errors are hard to correct, as hardly
anyone sees errata/corrections posted after publication), there is one author, or a small number
of co-authors who have directly collaborated on the text (pro: readers can check the background of
the authors and take into account the author's background, which may be important for the right
interpretation; attribution allows authors to build their reputation; con: no room for
corrections, contrasting opinions and alternative interpretations from other people), and it's a
mostly one-way push of information from the author to you (you could talk back via another
channel, e.g. email the author, but it's up to the author to decide whether your comments are seen
by others or whether they just disappear). TV and radio have the same properties.

Can the web change things so as to keep the pros, but reduce the cons? For example, Wikipedia
almost removes the notion of authorship (many articles are a patchwork of sentences written by
many different contributors, and the writers of those sentences are hidden away in the rarely-seen
edit history). Would it be possible to keep that collaborative spirit of Wikipedia whilst also
keeping the benefits of having named authors?

People like to criticise text on the web as shallow, and readers on the web as attention-deficit
info-snackers who lack the patience to follow a longer, carefully reasoned argument. It's true
that reading Twitter does not require a long attention span, but that doesn't worry me: it seems
that short-form content on the web is thriving *in addition to* the long form, and may even be
increasing readership of longer pieces of prose.
http://www.wired.com/magazine/2010/12/st_thompson_short_long/

With something like a novel, I'm not too worried if it's written by one person and printed on
paper, because it's more important that it is coherent and entertaining than whether it is
up-to-date and accurate. However, when factual accuracy, freedom of bias and clarity of
explanation are important, I am quite concerned about paper-based media. Even scientific
publishing, for example, mostly uses PDF files nowadays (which avoids the cost of distributing
paper, but is otherwise almost equivalent in its read-only, single-source, unchangeable
properties), despite science's self-mandated duty to seek the truth.

The reason I think collaborative writing is important is that any author can only be good at a
certain set of things. Maybe the author has the best insights of anybody in the world, but they
are bad at explaining them. In a research paper, I would really like to see the results obtained
by other research groups working on the same problem, including results that are published later.
In a book, which has a broader scope, the author can't possibly be the top world expert in all
matters covered in the book, so if someone who knows better has something to say about some part
of it, I as reader would really want to know!

In my imagination, the books of the future will be a bit like a cross between Wikipedia and
Quora/Stack Overflow. The coherent structure and prose of a Wikipedia article or a blog post,
combined with the interactive discussion properties of Quora. It will become normal to see several
opposing viewpoints on a subject, side-by-side, with the best (most well-grounded, insightful and
well-communicated) information bubbling to the top.

I would be very happy to let you annotate or even edit this blog post if the mechanics were right
-- if readers could see both our respective viewpoints, if we could change our mind and
amend/retract what we said, if it was clear who said what, if the system was meritocratic, etc.
Unfortunately I don't know of good software for doing that, so you'll have to leave your comments
in the Disqus box for now.


"I wish that Social Media tools could not only help organize protests, but also help
democratically fill the void of power after revolution."
http://twitter.com/bill_gross/status/31740255052763136

TODO: see "Libraries and the beauty of insight" in Evernote

For this to work, there will need to be filtering systems

Personal reputation will become even more precious than it is now, as it decides whether your
contributions are seen or whether they disappear in the noise. Initially, measures of reputation
will be deeply imperfect (just like nowadays' measures of merit, like the university you went to,
who you have worked with, how many Twitter followers you have
(http://adage.com/influencers2010/article?article_id=147957), how many languages your books have
been translated into, your h-index, how many votes you got in the election). One big flaw is that
these things measure a single number, which is obviously nonsense -- just because you're one of
the leading figures in theoretical particle physics doesn't mean that your opinion on archaeology
in Mesopotamia should count for very much. But even if you solve that, there are huge problems of
people trying to game the system. Attempts to fix modes of gaming typically make everything more
complicated and therefore worse.

Nowadays we have a constant fight for democracy, which is a formalised, quantitative process for
translating something vague and ill-defined (what kind of society the people want) into reality.
Most people agree on the general principles of democracy (e.g. you shouldn't get imprisoned just
because you have a different opinion), but the details of how the will of the people is
implemented and realised change every day. Similarly, I suspect, with reputation. The principle
(to what degree can you trust what I say on a given topic?) is reasonably clear, but the route to
actually implementing that principle will be a never-ending quest for improvement.

A closing note for any startup founders or investors reading this: nothing in this discussion is
actionable towards finding the Next Big Thing. What I am describing is a big social change which
takes place over the course of decades. Of course, businesses which recognise where the future is
going and solve specific problems within that space may do well, and businesses which try to
resist the change may find things getting harder for them. But it's not sudden, not black and
white.
